DOC-3498: `tinymceai` on-prem documentation. (Closing) (#4137)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/tinymceai-on-premises.adoc

= TinyMCE AI On-Premise
:navtitle: Overview
:description: Self-hosted AI writing assistance for TinyMCE; architecture, prerequisites, and topic guide
:keywords: AI, on-premises, self-hosted, deployment, overview

> The TinyMCE AI on-premises service is a self-hosted back end that powers AI writing assistance. It can be used with the TinyMCE rich text editor, particularly the xref:tinymceai.adoc[TinyMCE AI plugin], or as a standalone service. It runs entirely within the host infrastructure. Document content, conversation history, file attachments, and user data never leave the network.

Reviewer: > Document content, conversation history, file attachments, and user data never leave the network.
 This sounds like we are guaranteeing that those being sent to the AI services will never be stored/kept by the AI services, which are out of our control

Author: Softened — now clarifies data stays within the host network and is not stored by Tiny, while noting that data sent to LLM providers is subject to their policies. See 2e68692.

The service ships as a single Open Container Initiative (OCI) container image (`registry.containers.tiny.cloud/ai-service`). It exposes a REST API, a Management Panel, Server-Sent Events streaming, and an OpenAPI spec.

== Architecture

[.text-center]
image::tinymceai-on-premises/overview-fig-1.svg[alt="High-level architecture showing client token endpoint AI service LLM provider and data layer",width=100%]

Data flow for a single AI request:

> [arabic]

Reviewer: Just curious, what does `[arabic]` do?

Author: It's an AsciiDoc list style attribute that forces Arabic numeral numbering (1, 2, 3…), but it's redundant here since that's the default for first-level ordered lists. Removed all instances in cf8b90f.

> . The client application requests a signed token from the token endpoint.
> . The client sends the JWT and prompt to the AI service over HTTPS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The client application requests a JWT from the token endpoint.
. The client sends a promp with the JWT to the AI service over HTTPS 
```

Author: Applied — now reads "requests a JWT from the token endpoint" and "sends a prompt with the JWT to the AI service". See 2e68692.

. The AI service verifies the token, checks per-feature permissions, and forwards the prompt to the configured large language model (LLM).
. The LLM streams its response back to the client through Server-Sent Events (SSE).

> When used with TinyMCE, the `tinymceai` plugin handles steps 1, 2, and 4 automatically through the `tinymceai_token_provider` callback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When used with TinyMCE `tinymceai`, the plugin handles steps 1, 2, and 4 automatically through the `tinymceai_token_provider` callback.
```

Author: Applied. See 2e68692.

|Observability
|Structured request logs, OpenTelemetry, and Langfuse. All three run as independent simultaneous pipelines.

|Horizontal scaling
|The service is stateless; add replicas behind a load balancer without shared local state.
|===

== Prerequisites

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Requirement |Details

|Container runtime
|Docker 20.10{plus}, Podman 4{plus}, or any OCI-compatible runtime. Kubernetes, AWS ECS, or Azure Container Apps are also supported.

|SQL database
|MySQL 8.0 or PostgreSQL 13{plus} (16 recommended).

|Redis
|3.2.6{plus} (7.x recommended). Single node or Cluster mode supported. Sentinel not supported.

|LLM access
|At least one provider. Multiple providers can coexist.

|License key and registry credentials
|Provided by a Tiny account representative.

|Token endpoint
|A back end that signs HS256 JWTs.

|Reverse proxy (recommended)
|The AI service does not terminate Transport Layer Security (TLS). A reverse proxy such as nginx, HAProxy, or a cloud load balancer is recommended for TLS termination in production.
|===

== Choosing a setup path

[.text-center]
image::tinymceai-on-premises/complete-guide-fig-2.svg[Setup path decision tree,width=100%]

> Each path carries the same level of documentation. After identifying which path fits the operational model, complete its topic guides in the order listed.

Reviewer: This section gives me a false expectation. Where is the documentation for each path?

Author: Good point. Rewrote the section to clarify the decision tree is a visual summary of the topic guides listed below, not separate documentation paths. See 2e68692.

== Topic guides

> For a first-time deployment, progress through the guides in order. Each topic guide also stands alone when only one area applies.

Reviewer: > Each topic guide also stands alone when only one area applies.
I don't know what this means

Author: Rewrote — now reads: "Each guide can also be used independently for reference." See 2e68692.

= TinyMCE AI On-Premise
:navtitle: Overview
:description: Self-hosted AI writing assistance for TinyMCE; architecture, prerequisites, and topic guide
:keywords: AI, on-premises, self-hosted, deployment, overview

> The TinyMCE AI on-premises service is a self-hosted back end that powers AI writing assistance inside the TinyMCE rich text editor. It runs entirely within the host infrastructure. Editor content, conversation history, file attachments, and user data never leave the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TinyMCE AI on-premises service is a self-hosted back end that powers AI writing assistance. It can be used with the TinyMCE rich text editor, particularly the [link]TinyMCE AI plugin, or as a standalone service. It runs entirely within the host infrastructure. Document content, conversation history, file attachments, and user data never leave the network.
```
want to generalise its use cases to not just tinymce or the plugin

Author: Applied. Now mentions standalone API use and links to the TinyMCE AI plugin page. Also changed "Editor content" to "Document content".

The service ships as a single Open Container Initiative (OCI) container image (`registry.containers.tiny.cloud/ai-service`). It exposes a REST API, a Management Panel, Server-Sent Events streaming, and an OpenAPI spec.

== Architecture

[.text-center]

> image::tinymceai-on-premises/complete-guide-fig-1.svg[alt="Service architecture showing browser with TinyMCE token endpoint AI service database Redis and LLM providers",width=100%]

Reviewer 2: I like this diagram, but I worry that putting it on the Overview page, which might be people's first introduction to the product, could be overwhelming and/or give a false impression of the required complexity. Could we switch this for a simpler model that just gives the highlights, and use this somewhere we're talking about enterprise deployment?

Author: Good call. Swapped for a simplified diagram (`overview-fig-1.svg`) showing just the core request flow (client → token endpoint → AI service → LLM → database). Moved the detailed enterprise topology to the production deployment page in a collapsible block.

> Data flow for a single AI request:

Reviewer 2: True when used with the plugin (I think, though the JWT part feels a little odd), but that's not the only potential use. Can we generalise?

Author: Rewritten to use client-agnostic language. Steps now reference "the client application" rather than "the plugin". Added a note that the `tinymceai` plugin handles steps 1, 2, and 4 automatically when used with TinyMCE.

[arabic]
. The browser loads TinyMCE with the `tinymceai` plugin.
. The user triggers an AI feature (chat, review, quick action).
. The plugin calls the token endpoint, which signs an HS256 JSON Web Token (JWT) with the API Secret.
. The plugin sends the JWT and prompt to the AI service.
. The AI service verifies the token, checks per-feature permissions, and forwards the prompt to the configured large language model (LLM).
. The LLM streams its response back to the browser through Server-Sent Events.

The shared secret (API Secret) never leaves the back end; the editor and the AI service only ever see signed tokens.

== Capabilities

[cols="1,2",options="header"]
|===
|Capability |Details

|Conversational AI assistant

> |Multi-turn chat sidebar. Conversation history is isolated per user through the JWT `sub` claim.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Multi-turn AI chat with support for document and file context. Conversation history is isolated per user through the JWT `sub` claim.
```
trying to generalise a bit, not just talk about the plugin. not quite sure about the wording of the context part, but wanted to point out that it's not just a back and forth untethered from anything else

Author: Applied.

|Document review

> |Correctness, clarity, readability, tone, and translation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Review a document for correctness, clarity, readability, tone, and more, or translate to another language.
```

Author: Applied.

|Quick actions
|Rewrite, summarize, expand, change tone, fix grammar, translate, continue, and improve writing.

|LLM provider flexibility
|OpenAI, Anthropic, Google Gemini, Azure OpenAI, AWS Bedrock, Google Vertex AI, or any self-hosted OpenAI-compatible endpoint. Multiple providers can coexist.

|Model Context Protocol (MCP) integration
|Connect internal tools, databases, and knowledge bases through Model Context Protocol over Streamable HTTP transport.

|Web scraping and web search
|Pluggable endpoints for fetching web pages and running searches.

|Multi-tenant environments
|Isolated conversation history and per-tenant access keys through Environments.

|Per-user, per-feature permissions
|Fine-grained control through the `auth.ai.permissions` JWT claim.

|Streaming responses
|Server-Sent Events from the LLM back to the browser.

|File attachments

> |Database, filesystem, Amazon S3, or Azure Blob Storage.

Reviewer 2: this is where they're stored, not why they're useful?

```suggestion
|Use additional files as context for AI conversations. 
```
maybe?

Author: Applied. Now reads: "Use additional files as context for AI conversations. Storage options include database, filesystem, Amazon S3, or Azure Blob Storage."

|Observability
|Structured request logs, OpenTelemetry, and Langfuse. All three run as independent simultaneous pipelines.

|Horizontal scaling

> |The service is stateless. Share identical environment configuration across replicas.

Reviewer 2: I don't know enough to be sure, but this feels like a weird statement. Out of context or something?

Author: Reworded to: "The service is stateless; add replicas behind a load balancer without shared local state."

|===

== Prerequisites

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Requirement |Details

|Container runtime
|Docker 20.10{plus}, Podman 4{plus}, or any OCI-compatible runtime. Kubernetes, AWS ECS, or Azure Container Apps are also supported.

|SQL database
|MySQL 8.0 or PostgreSQL 13{plus} (16 recommended).

|Redis

> |3.2.6{plus} (7.x recommended). Single node, Sentinel, or Cluster mode.

Reviewer 2: Sentinel is explicitly _not_ supported iirc

```suggestion
|3.2.6{plus} (7.x recommended). Single node or Cluster mode supported. Sentinel not supported.
```

Author: Applied. Now reads: "Single node or Cluster mode supported. Sentinel not supported."

|LLM access
|At least one provider. Multiple providers can coexist.

|TinyMCE 8.0{plus}

> |The `tinymceai` plugin is a premium plugin.

Reviewer 2: Actually not required, if they want to use the API separately. Shouldn't be in this list.

Author: Removed the TinyMCE 8.0+ row from prerequisites entirely.

|License key and registry credentials
|Provided by a Tiny account representative.

|Token endpoint
|A back end that signs HS256 JWTs.

|Reverse proxy

> |The AI service does not terminate Transport Layer Security (TLS). Use nginx, HAProxy, or a cloud load balancer.

Reviewer 2: Is this actually _required_ for deployment, or just recommended?

Author: Changed to "(recommended)" — now reads: "A reverse proxy such as nginx, HAProxy, or a cloud load balancer is recommended for TLS termination in production."

|===

== Choosing a setup path

[.text-center]
image::tinymceai-on-premises/complete-guide-fig-2.svg[Setup path decision tree,width=100%]

Each path carries the same level of documentation. After identifying which path fits the operational model, complete its topic guides in the order listed.

== Topic guides

For a first-time deployment, progress through the guides in order. Each topic guide also stands alone when only one area applies.

[cols="1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Guide |Scope

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-getting-started.adoc[Getting started]
|Five-minute Docker Compose quick start. Stand up the AI service, database, Redis, token server, and a browser editor.

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-database.adoc[Database, Redis, and storage]

> |MySQL and PostgreSQL setup, Redis configuration, container runtimes (Docker, Podman, Kubernetes, ECS), and reverse proxy with TLS.

Reviewer 2: we use the term "data layer" elsewhere - at least in the diagrams - so might as well use it here? 

```suggestion
|Data layer setup: MySQL and PostgreSQL setup, Redis configuration, container runtimes (Docker, Podman, Kubernetes, ECS), and reverse proxy with TLS.
```

Reviewer 2: although the proxy is application layer... doesn't fit with the "database, redis, and storage" title either. thoughts?

Author: Added "Data layer setup:" prefix to the scope description. Left the page title as-is ("Database, Redis, and storage") since the reverse proxy content is a small section within that page — renaming the page would cascade into nav and xrefs, worth discussing separately.

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-providers.adoc[LLM providers]

> |OpenAI, Anthropic, Google Gemini, Azure OpenAI, AWS Bedrock, Google Vertex AI, and self-hosted endpoints (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio). Custom model catalog and API key rotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Connect to any OpenAI-compatible model, such as OpenAI, Anthropic, Google Gemini, Azure OpenAI, AWS Bedrock, Google Vertex AI, and self-hosted endpoints (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio). Custom model catalog and API key rotation.
```
trying to avoid implying a limitation

Author: Adjusted the wording slightly from the suggestion — Anthropic, Gemini, Bedrock etc. have their own APIs and aren't OpenAI-compatible, so grouped them separately: "Connect to OpenAI, Anthropic, Google Gemini, Azure OpenAI, AWS Bedrock, Google Vertex AI, or any OpenAI-compatible endpoint (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio)."

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-jwt.adoc[JWT authentication]
|HS256 signing model, required and optional claims, permissions reference, and token endpoint examples in 8 languages.

> |xref:tinymceai-on-premises-frameworks.adoc[Framework integration]

Reviewer 2: "framework integration"? that feels weird. do we usually use that kind of term? I'd keep it straightforward with "TinyMCE integration" unless we need it to be a wider term?

Author: Renamed to "TinyMCE integration" across the navtitle, nav.adoc, overview topic guides table, and all xrefs in the troubleshooting and JWT pages.

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-production.adoc[Production deployment]
|Kubernetes manifests, AWS ECS task definitions, horizontal scaling, sizing, security hardening, rate limiting, observability, backup and recovery, and upgrades.

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-advanced.adoc[Advanced scenarios]
|MCP server integration, web scraping and search, multi-tenant patterns, custom models with guardrails, and AI-powered document pipelines.

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-troubleshooting.adoc[Troubleshooting]
|Quick triage, container startup failures, JWT errors, LLM provider errors, editor issues, performance, and diagnostic recipes.

|xref:tinymceai-on-premises-reference.adoc[Reference]
|Environment variable reference, API endpoint reference, Server-Sent Events reference, and error code reference.
|===

== Support

* *Technical support:* https://support.tiny.cloud[Submit a support request] (available to customers with an active commercial license).
* *Account and licensing:* https://www.tiny.cloud/contact/[Contact Tiny].

When submitting a support request, include:

Container logs::
+
[source,console]
----
docker logs ai-service --tail 200
----

> Effective environment::

Reviewer 2: I might just not be familiar with the term, but I have no idea what "effective environment" is

Author: Renamed to "Environment variables" — clearer and self-explanatory. Also reordered the docker commands so both `docker inspect` entries are grouped together.

Redact secrets before submitting.
+
[source,console]
----
docker inspect ai-service | jq '.[0].Config.Env'
----

Health check::
+
[source,console]
----
curl -fsS http://localhost:8000/health
----
+
Expected response:
+
[source,json]
----
{"serviceName":"on-premises-http","uptime":1234}
----

Decoded JWT payload::
Strip the signature and decode with a JWT library.

Image version::
+
[source,console]
----

> docker inspect ai-service | jq '.[0].Config.Image'

Reviewer 2: nitpick, but putting this after the other docker one is just a little neater? less jumping around if someone is running through the steps

Author: Done — moved both `docker inspect` entries together after the health check.
